[Illustration]Maido, the lord daimyo, came strolling, late one May day,
along a pebbled pathway in his castle grounds at Kanazawa, and while
doing so he caught a last glimpse of the great red sun as it slowly sank
toward the western horizon.

"What a glorious sunset!" said he to himself, as he halted and breathed
deeply the sweetened air that floated by, lazily flagging the cherry and
cypress trees standing here and there in the garden about him.

He paused only a moment, and then slowly approached the family mansion,
where he cast his sandals upon the flagstone and bounded upon the
polished veranda with a vigour that bespoke a well-preserved age at
fifty or more. Once in the house he quietly proceeded to the great
chamber and softly clapped his hands, whereupon a servant noiselessly
approached, bowed low, and held for his convenience a silken kimono,[4]
which he donned and folded in front. Having thus clad himself he turned
his back upon Kimon (the Gate of Demons, or northwest comer of the
room), crossed his toes under him, and squatted upon the soft, matted
floor.

A second call brought another servant who placed on the floor in front
of him a lacquered brazier filled with live coals, a tobacco tray with
tobacco, and a little metal pipe with a long bamboo stem. Maido then sat
there, quiet and alone, smoking and wondering, and looking out over the
glistening waters at the beautiful sunset, until his eyes closed and his
head nodded, and perchance he dreamed of the glories yet to befall the
great and good house of Kanazawa.

Presently a sliding partition softly opened and there stole to his side
a little butterfly whose fairy-like steps did not awaken him and whose
presence was unheeded until she cautiously whispered:

"Heigh! my lord, my daimyo, am I welcome, that I come?"

"Heigh! my wife, my Kakezara, I trust it may not be other than welcome
now that you have chanced to come without Maido's permission."

"Even so, my honourable master, I present you with a child, born
erstwhile the seventh day."

"Then have you no better words than these? You know well my wishes.
Seven wives have I married and do now give shelter within this splendid
castle. To you, the last, is well known my wish, my hope, my command. It
is well that you bow low, for if the word be spoken falsely, and speak
you shall, then will I unsheathe the sword of Amanosakohoko and bury the
tempered steel deep in your heaving breast. No, I will not so degrade
you, but will sentence you to harakiri[5]--a death and punishment more
befitting your stupid self, for it is a great sin to disobey your lord
and master. But speak the word, and truly, and I will raise up your
blushing face and mete you the proudest and grandest within my gift.
Speak as I command, Kakezara, and you shall be the choice of my heart,
the queen of my household. All other wives shall be as servants and
shall respond to your bidding. Of kimonos you shall have without number.
Your chair shall be inlaid with mother-of-pearl and lacquered with pure
gold from the mines of Sado. Sweets suited to your taste shall be made
of the best and purest. Speak, O Kakezara, and you shall henceforth
reign queen of Maido's household."

"My lord, my daimyo, then I would that it were not true, for I cannot
undo that which is done even though I am to suffer the ills of an
unhappy lot: position is a husband's due, then a wife's happiness. By
the spirit of my ancestors and the grace of the gods your command has
been obeyed--it is a son."